---
description: 'Mitchell Waldrop provides a description of the edge of chaos in his book, Complexity: “The balance point -- often called the edge of chaos -- is where the compo'
author: []
datePublished: '2016-03-01T10:26:08.959Z'
publisher:
  domain: www.slideshare.net
  name: slideshare.net
dateModified: '2016-02-15T19:23:39.672Z'
title: ''
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-01-mitchell-waldrop-provides-a-description-of-the-edge-of-chaos.md
published: true
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
url: mitchell-waldrop-provides-a-description-of-the-edge-of-chaos/index.html
_context: 'http://schema.org'
_type: Article

---
Mitchell Waldrop provides a description of the edge of chaos in his book, Complexity: "The balance point -- often called the edge of chaos -- is where the components of a system never quite lock into place, and yet never quite dissolve into turbulence either. . . The edge of chaos is where life has enough stability to sustain itself and enough creativity to deserve the name of life. The edge of chaos is where new idea and innovative genotypes are forever nibbling away at the edges of the status quo, and where even the most entrenched old guard will eventually be overthrown. The edge of chaos is where centuries of slavery and segregation suddenly give way to the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s; where seventy years of Soviet communism suddenly give way to political turmoil and ferment; where eons of evolutionary stability suddenly give way to wholesale species transformation. The edge is the constantly shifting battle zone between stagnation and anarchy, the one place where a complex system can be spontaneous, adaptive and alive." Systems "on the edge" are notable for a "hunger" for novelty and disequilibrium that distinguishes them from rigidly ordered systems. At the same time, however, they also possess a deep underlying coherence that provides structure and continuity, and distinguishes them from chaotic systems. Theorists use words like "integrity," "identity" "persistent structure" and "self-reference" to describe this opposite characteristic. Systems that evolve along the edge of chaos periodically re-integrate into structures with temporary stability, which bear recognizable resemblance to the string of predecessor structures. They are free enough to change, but stable enough to stay recognizable. Complexity scientists have identified several characteristics that distinguish edge of chaos systems from systems that are either locked in rigid order, or too chaotic for any stability to emerge. These include: • Autonomous agents. Like a swarm of bees, a flock of birds, or a healthy market, these systems are made up of many individual actors who make choices about how to act based on information in their local environment. All the agents make choices simultaneously ("parallel processing"), both influencing and limiting each other's actions. • Networked structure. The agents don't act randomly. They share some common "rules" about how they decide what to do next. At the level of matter, these common rules are the laws of nature (gravity, electromagnetism, etc.). At the level of conscious actors, these are decision-making rules (preferences, interests, desires, etc.). These rules connect the agents together and allow a global coherence to emerge without any central source of direction -- the "swarm" has 3\. velocity, shape, direction and density that do not reside in any individual agent. The rules used by agents evolve based on their successfulness in the changing environment. The connections between agents in edge of chaos systems are "moderately dense" --- not so interconnected so the system freezes up, and not so disconnected that it disintegrates into chaos. • Profuse experimentation. These edge of chaos systems are full of novelty and experimentation. They have a quality of dynamic stability that is characterized by occasional rapid and unpredictable shifts in shape and direction. They can react to small changes in big and surprising ways (rumors fly like lightning; a mob forms; the market crashes; the hive swarms). Such systems can communicate almost instantaneously, experiment with dozens of possible responses if they encounter a roadblock, and rapidly exploit solutions when one is found. In describing the edge of chaos, complexity scientists have documented and analyzed qualities that humans have sought in their systems for some time. A vibrant democracy is an "edge of chaos" form of governance; a healthy market is an "edge of chaos" form of economics; a flexible and adaptive organization is an "edge of chaos" institution; and a mature, well-developed personality is an "edge of chaos" psyche. In many of our systems, however, we have created forms of organization that are locked in rigid order and incapable of adaptable evolution (e.g. bureaucracies, monopolies, dictatorships). These forms of social control were often responses to situations that were previously too chaotic. In multiple sectors of society, we now see a migration from both extremes of incoherent chaos and rigid order towards the middle "edge of chaos" where systems have the capacity to grow, learn and evolve. The attached materials describe some of the basic concepts of complex adaptive systems theory.